---
author: Major Hayden
date: '2019-08-16'
summary: Many cloud providers give you lots of memory with each instance and you
  can speed up tests and builds by using a ramdisk.
images:
- images/2019-08-16-jet-ski.jpg
slug: get-faster-gitlab-runners-with-a-ramdisk
tags:
- buildah
- containers
- fedora
- gitlab
- linux
- podman
title: Get faster GitLab runners with a ramdisk
---

![Jet ski moving fast]

When you build tons of kernels every day like my team does, you look for
speed improvements anywhere you can. Caching repositories, artifacts, and
compiled objects makes kernel builds faster and it reduces infrastructure
costs.

## Need for speed

We use GitLab CI in plenty of places, and that means we have a lot of
gitlab-runner configurations for OpenShift (using the kubernetes executor)
and AWS (using the docker-machine executor). The runner's built-in [caching]
makes it easy to upload and download cached items from object storage
repositories like Google Cloud Storage or Amazon S3.

However, there's an often overlooked feature hiding in the [configuration for
the docker executor] that provides a great performance boost: mounting tmpfs
inside your container. Not familiar with tmpfs? Arch Linux has a [great wiki
page for tmpfs] and James Coyle has a [well-written blog post] about what
makes it unique from the older ramfs.

RAM is much faster than your average cloud provider's block storage. It also
has incredibly low latency relative to most storage media. There's a [great
interactive latency page] that allows you to use a slider to travel back in
time to 1990 and compare all kinds of storage performance numbers. *(It's
really fun! Go drag the slider and be amazed.)*

Better yet, many cloud providers give you lots of RAM per CPU on their
instances, so if your work isn't terribly memory intensive, you can use a lot
of this RAM for faster storage.

## Enabling tmpfs in Docker containers

⚠️ **Beware of the dangers of tmpfs before adjusting your runner
configuration!** See the warnings at the end of this post.

This configuration is buried in the middle of the [docker executor
documentation]. You will need to add some extra configuration to your
`[runners.docker]` section to make it work:

```toml
[runners.docker]
  [runners.docker.tmpfs]
      "/ramdisk" = "rw,noexec"
```

This configuration mounts a tmpfs volume underneath `/ramdisk` inside the
container. By default, this directory will be mounted with `noexec`, but if
you need to execute scripts from that directory, change `noexec` to `exec`:

```toml
[runners.docker]
  [runners.docker.tmpfs]
      "/ramdisk" = "rw,exec"
```

In our case, compiling kernels requires executing scripts, so we use `exec`
for our tmpfs mounts.

**You must be specific for `exec`!** As an example, this tmpfs volume will be
mounted with `noexec` since that is the default:

```toml
[runners.docker]
  [runners.docker.tmpfs]
      "/ramdisk" = "rw"
```

## Extra speed

For even more speed, we moved the objects generated by `ccache` to the
ramdisk. The seek times are much lower and this allows `ccache` to look for
its cached objects much more quickly.

Git repositories are also great things to stash on tmpfs. Big kernel
repositories are usually 1.5GB to 2GB in size with tons of files. Checkouts
are really fast when they're done in tmpfs.

## Dangers are lurking

⚠️ As mentioned earlier, **beware of the dangers of tmpfs.**

* All of the containers on the machine will share the same amount of RAM for
  their tmpfs volumes. Be sure to account for how much each container will use
  and how many containers *could* be present on the same machine.

* Be aware of how much memory your tests will use when they run. In our case,
  kernel compiles can consume 2-4GB of RAM, depending on configuration, so we
  try our best to leave some memory free.

* These volumes also have no limits on how much data can go into the volume.
  However, if you put too much data into the tmpfs volume and your system runs
  critically low on available RAM, you could see a huge drop in performance,
  system instability, or even a crash. 🔥

*[Photo credit]*

[caching]: https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/configuration/advanced-configuration.html#the-runnerscache-section
[configuration for the docker executor]: https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/configuration/advanced-configuration.html#the-runnersdocker-section
[great wiki page for tmpfs]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Tmpfs
[well-written blog post]: https://www.jamescoyle.net/knowledge/951-the-difference-between-a-tmpfs-and-ramfs-ram-disk
[great interactive latency page]: https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~rcs/research/interactive_latency.html
[docker executor documentation]: https://docs.gitlab.com/runner/executors/docker.html#mounting-a-directory-in-ram
[Photo credit]: https://www.maxpixel.net/Water-Jet-Ski-Fast-Speed-Summer-Fun-Sport-1470072
[Jet ski moving fast]: /images/2019-08-16-jet-ski.jpg
