---
author: Major Hayden
categories:
- Blog Posts
date: '2021-09-06'
description: >-
    I set out to read a bunch of books this summer and succeeded! Here's my
    reading list. ðŸ“š
images:
- images/2021-09-06-cozy-library.jpg
slug: my-summer-2021-reading-list
tags:
- books
- reading
title: My summer 2021 reading list
type: post
---

{{< figure src="/images/2021-09-06-cozy-library.jpg" alt="Cozy home library with books and a chair" position="center" >}}

I set a goal this summer to read a little each day and work through my reading
list on Goodreads. I managed to make it through nine books! If you're looking
for some interesting books to read, this post highlights several of the ones I
enjoyed.

## Tom Clancy

I saw all the big Tom Clancy movies as a kid, such as The Hunt for Red October,
Clear and Present Danger, and Patriot Games. All of them felt so real and so
possible. My goal was to read them in order of publication and I went through a
few this summer.

Before the summer, I read _The Hunt for Red October_, _Without Remorse_, and
_Patriot Games_. _Red October_ reins supreme as my most favorite of the Jack
Ryan universe so far, but I really enjoyed the origin story of John Clark in
_Without Remorse_. It shed so much more light on his character that explains his
actions in later books.

### The Cardinal of the Kremlin

This book packed a lot of suspense into each chapter. It followed three groups:
members of the US intelligence community, members of the Soviet Union, and
tribes in Afghanistan. At many times in the book I found myself wondering how
big the clash would be if all three groups ran into each other. ðŸ˜±

My favorite parts of most Tom Clancy books is that the plot usually feels
plausible and the plot devices feel extremely well researched. The story in this
book is no exception. Also, the book gives you a follow-up on _Red October_ and
explains what happened to Ramius and the boat itself.


### Clear and Present Danger

I was very familiar with the movie of the same name starring Harrison Ford as I
watched it multiple times. The movie has always been one of my favorites, but as
soon as I started the book, I realized the movie covered a tiny part of the
story in the book.

The book had an incredible amount of action (more than the movie!) and the story
went much deeper into the US drug war. The culture of cartels and infighting
among them was laid bare many times. You really begin to question who had more
virtue -- the US coming in to fight the cartels or the cartels themselves.

There was also a lot more to many of the higher-up government characters that
appeared briefly in the movie. If you thought you disliked Ritter after seeing
the movie, just go ahead and read the book. ðŸ˜ 

### The Sum of All Fears

This book has it all. Nuclear weapons, submarine warfare, tensions in East
Germany, battles in the Middle East, and a US presidential cabinet that is
incredibly dysfunctional. During all of it, Jack Ryan finds himself in very
challenging conditions where he questions many of his beliefs. Many parts of
this book feel predictable for a while, but then something crazy happens and
nothing you predicted comes true.

ðŸ’£ **Warning:** the movie version of this book is **awful**. The movie features
the wrong bad guys, about 5% of the story from the book is included, and Jack
Ryan isn't even in the same stage of his life as he is in the book! The ending
made no sense and the presidential cabinet challenges were cut down to almost
nothing.

Trust me: read the book, skip the movie.

## Business time

In an effort to change gears, I sat down to read _Barbarians at the Gate: The
Fall of RJR Nabisco_ by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar. It's the *very* detailed
story of the leveraged buyout (LBO) of RJR Nabisco in the 1980's. Many people
say that it's one of the best business books out there and I can see why.

### Barbarians at the Gate

The book has tons of quotes and stories from everyone involved in the process
and those are woven into a (sometimes meandering) story that showcases how
everything gradually fell apart. Greed, incompetence, and ego reigns supreme
throughout the book and I learned more about LBOs than I ever wanted to know.

You don't need deep business knowledge to read this book, but knowing a little
bit about how the stock market works is helpful. The book focuses mainly on the
people and the author works diligently to explain some of the trickier financial
events.

## Something dark

I was looking for a new video game to play with a good story, and [Spec Ops: The
Line] showed up in one of the lists. I played it a long time ago and the story
was incredibly unique and gripping. The only thing that came close for me was
Half-Life. The story was loosely based on _Heart of Darkness_, by Joseph Conrad.
I set out to read the story to better understand the connection. (If you've seen
the movie _Apocalypse Now_, that one is loosely inspired by the same book.)

### Heart of Darkness

First off, this story is quite dark and there are quite a few cringe-worthy and
racist descriptions of people that the main character meets along the way. The
book was written in the 1890's, so take that into consideration if you read it.

The book is told in first person by a single man. Some of it feels really clear
while some of the story is shrouded in a haze. The author leaves a lot to the
imagination and I found myself going backwards a page or two to figure out what
was happening. Prepare yourself for a dark, troubling story that will leave you
with more questions than answers.

## What's better than an apocalypse?

After reading _Heart of Darkness_, I searched for some apocalyptic and
post-apocalyptic fiction to keep the dark theme going. I read through a bunch of recommended lists and found two books: _The Passage_ and _Earth Abides_.

### The Passage

_The Passage_ is the first book in a trilogy by Justin Cronin. My favorite part
about this book is that you get to see events before the apocalypse, the events
during, and the events long after. So many of these books seem to jump in after
something bad has happened and you're left wondering what the event really was.
(_The Road_ from Cormac McCarthy fits this description but it's an incredible
book and I recommend it.)

The book starts in a version of the USA that feels like the present, but some
things are a little off. For example, there are government checkpoints on
various highways and New Orleans is essentially abandoned. A strange virus was
discovered in South America that somehow cures various conditions (even cancer),
but then people either die after a while or they go into an unusual
vampire/zombie state. However, this isn't your average zombie book -- it goes
much, much deeper.

The first third of the book covers the time before and during the world-ending
event. The second third goes forward about 100 years to people trying to survive
afterwards. The last third goes forward a few more years when everything gets
worse (you wonder how this is possible).

This book has deep commentary on life, death, love, relationships, religion, and
humanity. It lays bare what it means to be human. I wish I could explain it
better, but that's the best I can do.

**I could not put this book down.** 

### Earth Abides

I took a break from _The Passage_ trilogy to change gears and read one of the
original post-apocalyptic (called "after the fall" back then) books called
_Earth Abides_ by George R. Stewart. It was written in the 1950's and follows
the main character as he wakes up after a snake bite to find out that some kind
of disease has stricken the entire USA.

At first, he's confused at where everyone has gone, but he finds newspaper
clippings and clues in his small town that help him understand what happened.
The thing I liked about this book is that things at first are easy. Lots of
people had food left over in fridges and grocery stores were well stocked. Even
the power and water were working.

Over time, all of that degrades, as does the main character's mood. Things
become more desperate and a gap widens between the people who lived before the
apocalypse and those born after.

This book has some derogatory and outdated stereotypes around people of color
and women, but there is plenty of commentary on humanity and society that holds
true. I found it to be quite boring in parts, but I enjoyed it overall.

### The Twelve

Back to Justin Cronin's trilogy I went! His second book shows that there's a lot
more to the infected people (called "virals" in the book) than meets the eye.
The disease has mind-control properties where certain beings used as test
subjects in the first novel had power over the viral hordes.

Many of the character from the first book are back and different challenges
await them. This book feels much more desperate than the first. Sometimes I find
that the second book in some trilogies lacks in suspense compared to the first,
but you'll find plenty of suspenseful moments here.

If you don't think things can get worse, they can. This book proves it in great
detail.

### The City of Mirrors

The final book of _The Passage_ trilogy ties up all of the loose ends. As you
read it, you're bouncing between two or three different events at the same time
that all seem like they will come together to destroy everyone.

The book begins on a fairly positive note, but later, everyone seems to be
running on empty and all may be lost. One of the most critical characters in the
book, Amy, has her true purpose exposed (finally!) and you finally learn why you
see those diary excerpts being presented at a conference after the year 1000
A.V. (after virus).

This trilogy ends in such a way where you feel like the story is resolved, but
you still have questions. Some may look at the ending and say "Wow, that's
terribly sad and soul-crushing." while others look at it as the most beautiful
ending imaginable. You'll have to see for yourself. ðŸ˜‰

[Spec Ops: The Line]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spec_Ops:_The_Line#Narrative_design

*Photo credit: [Nick Hillier on Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/IEkMMvdZFc0)*
